In cooperation with the National Technical
Committee for Hydric Soils
Field Indicators of
Hydric Soils in the
United States
A Guide for Identifying and Delineating
Hydric Soils, Version 9.0, 2024
S7 A11 F21 A3
A1 F3 S6 A18
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
in the United States
A Guide for Identifying and Delineating Hydric Soils
Version 9.0, 2024
United States Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resources Conservation Service,
in cooperation with the
National Technical Committee for Hydric Soils
Edited by L. M. Vasilas, Soil Scientist, NRCS, Washington, DC; A.
Miller, NRCS, New Mexico; J. F. Berkowitz, Soil Scientist, USACE,
Vicksburg, MS; Richard Griffin, Prairieview A&M University; and Colby
Moorberg, Kansas State University
ii
In accordance with Federal civil rights law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
civil rights regulations and policies, the USDA, its agencies, offices, and employees,
and institutions participating in or administering USDA programs are prohibited from
discriminating based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, gender identity
(including gender expression), sexual orientation, disability, age, marital status, family/
parental status, income derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, or
reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any program or activity conducted
or funded by USDA (not all bases apply to all programs). Remedies and complaint
filing deadlines vary by program or incident.
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program
information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, American Sign Language, etc.) should
contact the responsible agency or USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice
and TTY) or contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339.
Additionally, program information may be made available in languages other than
English. To file a program discrimination complaint, complete the USDA Program
Discrimination Complaint Form, AD-3027, found online at How to File a Program
Discrimination Complaint and at any USDA office or write a letter addressed to USDA
and provide in the letter all of the information requested in the form. To request a copy
of the complaint form, call (866) 632-9992. Submit your completed form or letter to
USDA by: (1) mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Office of the Assistant Secretary
for Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, D.C. 20250-9410; (2)
fax: (202) 690-7442; or (3) email: program.intake@usda.gov.
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.
Copies of this publication can be obtained from:
NRCS Distribution Center
1-888-526-3227
nrcsdistributioncenter@ia.usda.gov
Information contained in this publication and additional information concerning hydric
soils are maintained on the NRCS Hydric Soils web page.
Citation: United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 2024. Field Indicators of Hydric Soils in the United States, Version 9.0.
Cover: A variety of hydric soil profiles meeting a field indicator of hydric soils. The
top row of pictures from left to right represent S7, Dark Surface; A11, Depleted Below
Dark Surface; F21, Red Parent Material; and A3, Black Histic. The bottom row from
left to right represent A1, Histosol; F3, Depleted Matrix; S6, Stripped Matrix; and A18,
Iron Monosulfide.
iii
Foreword
“Field Indicators of Hydric Soils in the United States” has been
developed by soil scientists of the Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) in cooperation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service;
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; the Environmental Protection
Agency; various regional, State, and local agencies; universities; and
the private sector. The editors recognize that this guide could not have
been developed without the efforts of many individuals. Included in this
publication are the hydric soil indicators approved by the NRCS and
the National Technical Committee for Hydric Soils (NTCHS) for use in
identifying, delineating, and verifying hydric soils in the field.
v
Contents
Foreword ............................................................................................... iii
Contents .................................................................................................v
Index to Field Indicators.......................................................................vi
Introduction ............................................................................................1
Concept................................................................................................2
General Guidance for Using the Indicators..........................................4
To Comment on the Indicators.............................................................7
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils ..........................................................11
All Soils..............................................................................................11
Sandy Soils........................................................................................20
Loamy and Clayey Soils.....................................................................25
References ...........................................................................................35
Glossary ...............................................................................................37
Appendices ..........................................................................................49
Appendix 1: Approved Indicators by Land Resource Regions
(LRRs) and Certain Major Land Resource Areas (MLRAs)............49
Appendix 2: Test Indicators by Land Resource Regions (LRRs)
and Certain Major Land Resource Regions (MLRAs)....................50
Appendix 3: Indicators that Have Been Deleted or Are No Longer
Approved for Use............................................................................51
vi
Index to Field Indicators
All Soils
A1.—Histosol or Histel............................ 11
A2.—Histic Epipedon..............................12
A3.—Black Histic....................................12
A4.—Hydrogen Sulfide...........................12
A5.—Stratified Layers.............................12
A6.—Organic Bodies..............................13
A7.—5 cm Mucky Mineral.......................14
A8.—Muck Presence..............................14
A9.—1 cm Muck.....................................14
A10.—2 cm Muck...................................15
A11.—Depleted Below Dark Surface.....15
A12.—Thick Dark Surface......................17
A13.—Alaska Gleyed.............................17
A14.—Alaska Redox..............................18
A15.—Alaska Gleyed Pores...................19
A16.—Coast Prairie Redox....................19
A17.—Mesic Spodic...............................19
A18.—Iron Monosulfides........................20
Sandy Soils
S1.—Sandy Mucky Mineral....................20
S2.—2.5 cm Mucky Peat or Peat...........21
S3.—5 cm Mucky Peat or Peat..............21
S4.—Sandy Gleyed Matrix.....................21
S5.—Sandy Redox.................................21
S6.—Stripped Matrix...............................22
S7.—Dark Surface..................................23
S8.—Polyvalue Below Surface...............23
S9.—Thin Dark Surface..........................24
S11.—High Chroma Sands....................24
S12.—Barrier Islands 1 cm Muck...........25
Loamy and Clayey Soils
F1.—Loamy Mucky Mineral....................25
F2.—Loamy Gleyed Matrix.....................25
F3.—Depleted Matrix..............................26
F6.—Redox Dark Surface......................27
F7.—Depleted Dark Surface..................28.
F8.—Redox Depressions.......................28
F10.—Marl..............................................28
F11.—Depleted Ochric...........................28
F12.—Iron-Manganese Masses.............28
F13.—Umbric Surface............................29.
F16.—High Plains Depressions.............30
F17.—Delta Ochric.................................30
F18.—Reduced Vertic............................30
F19.—Piedmont Flood Plain Soils..........31
F20.—Anomalous Bright Loamy Soils...31.
F21.—Red Parent Material.....................31
F22.—Very Shallow Dark Surface..........33
1
Introduction
“Field Indicators of Hydric Soils in the United
States” is a guide to help identify and delineate
hydric soils in the field (fig. 1). Field indicators
are not intended to replace or modify the
requirements contained in the definition of a
hydric soil. Proper use of the indicators requires
a basic knowledge of soil-landscape relationships
and soil survey procedures. The National
Technical Committee for Hydric Soils (NTCHS)
defines a hydric soil as a soil that formed under
conditions of saturation, flooding, or ponding long
enough during the growing season to develop
anaerobic conditions in the upper part (“Changes
in Hydric Soils of the United States, 60 Fed.
Reg. 10349,” 1995). Most hydric soils exhibit
characteristic morphologies that result from
repeated periods of saturation or inundation that
last more than a few days.
2
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
Saturation or inundation, when combined with
microbial activity in the soil, causes the depletion
of oxygen. Prolonged anaerobic conditions
promote certain biogeochemical processes, such
as the accumulation of organic matter,
denitrification, and the chemical transformation
and translocation of oxidized iron, manganese,
and sulfur species. These processes indicate that
wetland functions are occurring within the soil
and result in distinctive characteristics that persist
during both wet and dry periods that are useful for
identifying hydric soils in the field. The indicators
are used to identify the hydric soil component of
wetlands; however, there are some hydric soils
that lack any of the currently approved indicators.
Therefore, the failure to meet the requirements of
an indicator does not prevent classification of the
soil as hydric. Such soils can be observed and
documented, and repeated morphologies may be
used to develop a new field indicator for inclusion
in this guide.
The indicators are designed to be regionally
specific. The description of each indicator
identifies the land resource regions (LRRs) and
major land resource areas (MLRAs) in which
the indicator can be applied. The geographic
extent of LRRs and MLRAs is defined in “U.S.
Department of Agriculture Handbook 296” (USDA,
NRCS, 2022). See the map of LRRs (see figs.
6 and 7) and the list of LRR-specific indicators
(Appendices 1 and 2).
The list of indicators is dynamic; changes and
additions are anticipated with new research and
field testing. The section “To Comment on the
Indicators” (see p. 7) provides guidance on how to
recommend updates and other edits. Any
modifications to the indicators must be approved
by NRCS and the NTCHS. The user of this
guidance is required to check the current version
of the indicators, available on the NTCHS web
page.
Concept
Hydric soil indicators are formed predominantly
by the accumulation, loss, or redistribution of
manganese, iron, sulfur, or carbon compounds
under saturated and anaerobic conditions. The
processes and the soil features that develop
under these conditions are described in the
following paragraphs.
Iron and Manganese Reduction,
Translocation, and Accumulation
In an anaerobic environment, soil microbes
reduce iron from the ferric (Fe3+
) to the ferrous
(Fe2+
) form and manganese from the manganic
(Mn4+
) to the manganous (Mn2+
) form. Of the two,
evidence of iron reduction is observed more
widespread in soils due to the relatively strong
appearance of even small amounts of its
rust-colored pigments that ferric minerals impart
on the soil matrix (predominant color).
Areas in the soil where iron is reduced often
develop characteristic bluish-gray or
greenish-gray colors known as gley (colors with
value 4 or more on the gley pages in the “Munsell
Soil Color Book” (X-Rite, 2009)). Ferric iron is
insoluble, but ferrous iron enters the soil solution
where it may be moved or translocated to other
areas of the soil. Areas that have lost iron typically
develop characteristic gray or reddish-gray colors
and are known as redox depletions.
If a soil reverts to an aerobic state, iron that is in
solution will oxidize and become concentrated in
patches as soft masses and along root channels
or other pores. These areas of oxidized iron are
called redox concentrations. Since water
movement in these saturated or inundated soils
can be multidirectional, redox depletions and
concentrations can occur anywhere in the soil
and have irregular shapes and sizes. Soils that
are saturated and contain ferrous iron at the time
of sampling may change color upon exposure
to the air, as ferrous iron is rapidly converted to
ferric iron in the presence of oxygen. Such soils
are said to have a reduced matrix (Vepraskas,
1994). Redox concentrations, depletions, and
reduced matrices are collectively referred to as
redoximorphic features.
While indicators related to iron (Fe) or manganese
(Mn) depletions and concentrations are most
3
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
common in hydric soils, they cannot form in soils
with parent materials that are low in Mn or Fe
content. Soils that formed in such materials may
have low-chroma colors that are not related to
saturation and reduction. Such soils may exhibit
other hydric soil morphologic features that form
through the accumulation of organic matter.
Sulfate Reduction
Sulfur is one of the least thermodynamically
favorable alternative electron acceptors to
chemically reduce under anaerobic conditions
(McBride, 1994). As a result, a reduction of sulfur
occurs in portions of the landscape that
experience prolonged periods of persistent
saturation, flooding, or ponding. When these
conditions are met, microbial respiration
induces the conversion of sulfate (SO4
2-
) to
sulfide (S2-
). The resultant S2-
can rapidly react to
form hydrogen sulfide gas (H2
S), or in the
presence of reduced iron, can precipitate
amorphous iron monosulfide (FeS) and other
compounds. The formation and diffusion of H2
S
gas results in a “rotten egg” odor, which can be
used to identify hydric soils as described in field
indicator A4, Hydrogen Sulfide. Iron monosulfide
(FeS) concentrations form as dark-gray or black
precipitates that coat soil pore linings and ped
faces (adapted from Vaughan et al., 2016). These
morphological features are documented using
multiple rapid field tests that distinguish FeS
from other dark-colored materials in soil (e.g.,
organic matter, manganese oxides). Hydric soils
are present when FeS is observed near the soil
surface, as described in field indicator A18, Iron
Monosulfide.
Organic Matter Accumulation
Soil microbes use carbon compounds that occur
in organic matter as an energy source. The
rate at which soil microbes use organic carbon,
however, is considerably lower in a saturated
and anaerobic environment than under aerobic
conditions. Therefore, in saturated soils, partially
decomposed organic matter may accumulate.
The result in wetlands is often the development
of thick organic surface horizons, such as peat or
muck, or dark organic-rich mineral surface layers.
Determining the Texture of Soil Materials
High in Organic Carbon
Soil materials fall into three categories based
upon the organic carbon content: organic soil,
mucky mineral soil, and mineral soil. In lieu of
laboratory data, the following field estimation
method can be used to categorize soil material
that is wet or nearly saturated with water. This
method may be inconclusive with loamy or
clayey mineral soils. Gently rub the wet soil
material between forefinger and thumb. If upon
the first or second rub the material feels gritty,
it is mineral soil material. If after the second
rub the material feels greasy, it is either mucky
mineral or organic soil material. Gently rub
the material two or three more times. If after
these additional rubs it feels gritty or plastic,
it is mucky mineral soil material; if it still feels
greasy, it is organic soil material. If the material
is organic soil material, a further division should
be made. Organic soil materials are classified
as muck, mucky peat, or peat. Differentiating
criteria are based on the percentage of visible
fibers observable with a hand lens in an
undisturbed state and after rubbing between
thumb and fingers 10 times. Muck, mucky peat,
and peat correspond to the textures sapric,
hemic, and fibric. If there is a conflict between
unrubbed and rubbed fiber content, rubbed
content is used. Live roots are disregarded
in this test. Other methods of determining the
organic soil matter category, such as applying
the von Post humification scale (von Post,
1926), can also be used.
Cautions
A soil that is drained or protected (for instance,
by dikes or levees) meets the definition of
a hydric soil if the upper part formed under
anaerobic conditions in an unaltered state.
Drained or protected hydric soils generally have
one or more of the indicators. Not all areas
that have hydric soils qualify as wetlands. For
example, a soil that formed under anaerobic
conditions but no longer has wetland hydrology
nor supports hydrophytic vegetation still meets
the definition of a hydric soil. However, the
area will not meet the requirements of a federal
wetland determined by the three-factor approach
4
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
(presence of hydric soils, wetland hydrology, and
hydrophytic vegetation).
There are hydric soils with morphologies that are
difficult to interpret. These include soils with black,
gray, or red parent materials; soils with high pH or
salts; soils high or low in organic matter content;
recently developed hydric soils; and soils high in
iron inputs. In these cases, the current published
indicators do not always function to identify a
hydric soil. As long as the soil meets the definition
of a hydric soil, the lack of an indicator does not
preclude the soil from being hydric.
The indicators were developed mostly to identify
the boundary of hydric soil areas and generally
work best on the margins. Additionally, indicators
are designed to leverage the most readily
observable redoximorphic features, which are
more likely to occur in soils that cycle between
anaerobic (reduced) and aerobic (oxidized)
conditions. It is important to acknowledge that
portions of an area under near-constant
saturation may not display an indicator. Therefore,
a prudent investigator might transect across the
wetland towards the upland position to locate the
wetland boundary.
Morphological features of hydric soils indicate that
saturation and anaerobic conditions have existed
under either contemporary or former hydrologic
regimes. Where soil morphology seems
inconsistent with the landscape, vegetation,
or observable hydrology, it is recommended
to consult with an experienced soil or wetland
scientist to determine whether the soil is hydric.
General Guidance for Using the
Indicators
Observe and Document the Site
Before making any decision about the presence
or absence of hydric soils, the overall site and
how it interacts with the soil should be
considered. The steps below, while not required
to identify a hydric soil, can help to explain why
a hydric soil is or is not present. Always look at
the landscape features of the immediate site and
compare them to the surrounding areas. Try to
contrast the features of wet and dry sites that
are in close proximity. When observing slope
features, look first at the area immediately around
the sampling point. For example, a nearly level
bench or depression at the sampling point may be
more important to the wetness of the site than the
overall landform on which the bench or
depression occurs. Understanding how water
moves across the site helps to clarify the reasons
for the presence or absence of hydric soil
indicators.
Observe and Document the Soil
To observe and document a hydric soil, first
remove from the soil surface any woody material
larger than 2 cm in cross section that cannot be
crushed or shredded when rubbed. Do not
remove the organic surface layers of the soil,
which generally consist of plant remains in
various stages of decomposition. Dig a hole and
describe the soil profile. In general, the hole
should be dug to the depth needed to document
an indicator or to confirm the absence of
indicators. For most soils, the recommended
excavation depth is approximately 50 cm
(20 inches) from the soil surface, although a
shallower soil pit may suffice for some indicators
(e.g., A2, Histic Epipedon). Use the completed
profile description to determine which hydric soil
indicators have been met.
The accumulation of organic matter in these
soils may mask redoximorphic features in the
surface layers. For soils with thick, dark surface
layers, deeper examination may be required when
field indicators are not observed at a depth of
50 cm (20 inches) or less from the soil surface.
Examination to a depth of 1 m (40 inches) or
more may be needed to determine whether the
soils meet the requirements of indicator A12,
Thick Dark Surface. A soil auger or probe may be
useful for sampling soil materials below a depth of
20 inches.
Whenever possible, excavate the soil deep
enough to determine if there are layers or
materials present that might restrict soil
5
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
drainage. This determination will help to indicate
why the soil may or may not be hydric. After a
sufficient number of exploratory excavations have
been made to determine the soil hydrologic
relationships at the site, subsequent excavations
can be limited to an adequate depth for
identifying hydric soil indicators. Consider taking
photographs of both the soil and the overall site,
including a clearly marked measurement scale in
pictures of soil profiles.
When applying the indicators, the depth at which
measurements begin differs based on the type of
soil material encountered and regional differences
in soils and climate. For indicators A1, A2, A3,
S2, and S3 in all LRRs, measurements should
start at the soil surface. For all indicators in R,
W, X, and Y and for indicators F6 and F7 in all
LRRs, all measurements should start at the top
of the uppermost mineral layer. For all other
indicators, except those in LRRs R, W, X, and Y
and indicators F6 and F7, measurements should
start at the top of the uppermost muck or mineral
layer (fig. 2).
All colors noted in this guide refer to moist
Munsell colors (X-Rite, 2009). Dry soils should
be moistened until the color no longer changes,
and wet soils should be allowed to dry until they
no longer glisten (fig. 3). Care should be taken to
avoid over-moistening dry soil.
Soil chromas specified in the indicators do not
have decimal points; however, intermediate colors
do occur. Colors should not be rounded to make
the chroma meet the requirements of an indicator.
A soil matrix with chroma between 2 and 3 should
be described as having chroma of 2+. It would not
meet any indicator that requires chroma of 2 or
less.
In contrast, the color value should be rounded to
the nearest color chip when using the indicators.
For example, a color in between a value of 3 and
4 should be rounded and not excluded from
meeting either F3, Depleted Matrix or F6, Redox
Dark Surface, because the color occurs between
color chips. If the value is closer to 3, then F6 or
some other dark surface indicator should be
considered. If it is closer to 4, then F3 or some
other redoximorphic feature indicator should be
considered.
Always examine soil matrix colors in the field
immediately after sampling. Ferrous iron in the
soil can oxidize rapidly, resulting in the
development of colors with higher chroma or
redder hue. Soils that are saturated at the time of
sampling may contain reduced iron and/or
manganese that cannot be detected by the eye.
Under saturated conditions, redox concentrations
may be absent or difficult to see, particularly in
dark-colored soils. It may be necessary to let the
6
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
soil dry (for 5 to 30 minutes or more) to a moist
state before the iron or manganese oxidizes and
the redoximorphic features become visible.
Pay particular attention to changes in
microtopography over short distances. Small
changes in elevation may result in repetitive
sequences of hydric/nonhydric soil mosaics,
making the delineation of individual areas of
hydric and nonhydric soils difficult. Procedures
have been developed to address mosaic scenar
scenarios (USACE, 2012). The shape of the
local landform can greatly affect the movement of
water through the landscape. Significant changes
in parent material or lithologic discontinuities in
the soil can also affect the hydrologic properties
of the soil.
Indicators that have requirements that allow
a chroma of greater than 2 can also have a
chroma of greater than 2 above the layer or
layers meeting the requirement of the indicator.
Indicators that require a chroma of 2 or less
only permit a chroma of 2 or more within a zone
thinner than 6 inches above it, and the remainder
of the material above the indicator must have a
chroma of 2 or less (fig. 4).
Hydric soil indicators were developed to find
the hydric soil boundary. Many of the features
used to identify a soil as a hydric soil are better
expressed at the wetland boundary and may
not be evident as you move to the center of the
wetland. As wetlands dry out, manganese and
iron diffuse to the boundary so that redoximorphic
concentrations are more abundant near the
boundary and may be absent in the middle of a
wetland.
Field indicators are best expressed at the
boundary of a wetland. The interior of a wetland
7
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
may become depleted in manganese and iron
or, if currently saturated, any manganese or iron
could remain in solution and thus not be visible.
In this case, the soil will lack any redoximorphic
indicators. However, if you lack an indicator in the
obvious interior of a wetland, you should transect
out toward the boundary to see if an indicator is
more evident toward the wetland boundary.
Soil Texture and the Indicators
Hydric soil indicators occur in three groups.
Indicators for “All Soils” are used for any soil
layers regardless of texture (A indicators).
Indicators listed under “Sandy Soils,” (S
indicators), as well as any language that refers to
sandy layers or materials, refer to soil materials
with USDA textures of loamy fine sand or coarser.
Indicators listed under “Loamy and Clayey Soils,”
(F indicators), as well as any language that refers
to loamy or clayey materials or layers, are used
for soil materials with textures of loamy very fine
sand and finer. Both sandy layers and loamy or
clayey layers can occur in the same soil profile.
If this occurs, you should look for sandy (S)
indicators in the sandy layers and loamy and
clayey (F) indicators in the loamy and clayey
material.
It is permissible to combine certain hydric soil
indicators if all requirements of the indicators are
met except minimum thickness. The most
restrictive requirements for layer thickness in any
indicators used must be met. Therefore, a soil is
hydric if its layers meet the requirements of both
S and F indicators, except thickness, such that
when both layers are combined, the more
restrictive indicator thickness requirement is met.
For example, if you meet all the requirements of
one indicator except it requires a minimum
thickness of 10 cm (4 inches) and all the
requirements of another indicator in a separate
layer and it requires a minimum thickness of 15
cm (6 inches), the cumulative thickness of the two
layers must be at least 15 cm (6 inches).
Not all indicators are possible candidates for
combination. For example, indicator F2, Loamy
Gleyed Matrix, has no thickness requirement and
is not a candidate for combination.
To Comment on the Indicators
The indicators are revised and updated as field
data are collected to improve our understanding
of hydric soil processes. Revisions, additions, and
other comments regarding field observations of
hydric soil conditions that cannot be documented
using the presently recognized hydric soil
indicators are welcome. Any suggestions for
modifications must be approved by the NTCHS.
Guidelines for requesting changes to field
indicators are as follows:
1. To propose a new indicator or revision to an
existing indicator, the following documentation
is required as a minimum to accompany all
requests for additions and changes to existing
hydric soil indicators for consideration into
future versions of the “Field Indicators of
Hydric Soils in the United States”:
a. Detailed descriptions of at least three
pedons that document the addition or
change and detailed descriptions of the
neighboring nonhydric pedons.
b. Detailed vegetative documentation recording
the specific plant community at each of
the six pedon locations summarizing any
contrasting patterns between the proposed
upland and hydric positions.
c. Saturation/inundation data and
oxidation-reduction potential (Eh) data
for a duration that captures the saturation
cycle (dry-wet-dry) of at least one of the
hydric pedons and one of the nonhydric
pedons. Precipitation and in-situ soil-water
pH data from the same sites should also be
provided (fig. 5). Data are to be collected
according to the Hydric Soil Technical
Standard (Berkowitz et al., 2021).
2. To add or delete a test indicator, the following
documentation is required to accompany all
requests for adding or deleting a test indicator
in “Field Indicators of Hydric Soils in the
United States”:
8
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
a. Detailed descriptions of at least three
hydric pedons that document the test
indicator and detailed descriptions of three
neighboring nonhydric pedons.
b. Detailed vegetative documentation
recording the specific plant community
at each of the six pedon locations,
summarizing any contrasting patterns
between the proposed upland and hydric
positions.
c. All requests involving a and b above
require a short written description that
identifies the problem, explains the
rationale for the request, and provides the
following:
• A person responsible and point of
contact (email and postal addresses
and phone number)
• A timeline for supporting data and final
report to be delivered to NTCHS
• A timeline requested for final NTCHS
decision and partners involved in the
project
• Requests, plans, and data should be
sent to the current Chair of the National
Technical Committee for Hydric Soils.
9
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
10
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
11
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
The indicator descriptions are structured as
follows:
1. Alphanumeric listing (A, S, or F indicators)
2. Short name
3. Applicable land resource regions (LRRs in
italic)
4. Requirements of the field indicator
5. User notes
For example, A2 is the alphanumeric listing for the
second indicator for “All Soils”; “Histic Epipedon”
is the short name; “For use in all LRRs” indicates
the applicable regions; and “a histic epipedon
underlain by mineral soil material with chroma 2”
or less is the requirements of the indicator. Any
accompanying user notes that follow the indicator
provide useful tips or context to the indicator
guidance.
All Soils
“All Soils” refers to soil layers with any USDA soil
texture.
All mineral layers above any of the layers
meeting the requirements of any A indicator,
except for indicators A16 and A18, have a
dominant chroma of 2 or less, or the thickness
of the layers with a dominant chroma of more
than 2 is less than 15 cm (6 inches). In addition,
nodules and concretions are not considered to
be redox concentrations for the application of the
indicators.
A1.—Histosol or Histel. For use in all LRRs.
Classifies as a Histosol (except Folist) or as a
Histel (except Folistel).
User Notes: In a Histosol, organic soil material is
typically 40 cm (16 inches) or more of the
upper 80 cm (32 inches) (fig. 8). Organic soil
materials have organic carbon content (by weight)
of 12 percent or more. These materials include
muck (sapric soil material), mucky peat (hemic
soil material), and peat (fibric soil material). See
“Keys to Soil Taxonomy” (Soil Survey Staff, 2022)
for a complete definition.
12
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
A2.—Histic Epipedon. For use in all LRRs. A
histic epipedon underlain by mineral soil material
with chroma of 2 or less.
User Notes: The surface horizon of most histic
epipedons has organic soil material 20 cm (8
inches) or more thick (fig. 9). Aquic conditions or
artificial drainage is required. See “Keys to Soil
Taxonomy” (Soil Survey Staff, 2022) for a
complete definition.
A3.—Black Histic. For use in all LRRs. A layer
of peat, mucky peat, or muck 20 cm (8 inches) or
more thick starting at a depth of 15 cm (6 inches)
or less from the soil surface with a hue of 10YR
or yellower, value of 3 or less, and chroma of 1
or less and underlain by mineral soil material with
chroma of 2 or less.
User Notes: Unlike indicator A2, this indicator
does not require proof of aquic conditions or
artificial drainage (see fig. 9).
A4.—Hydrogen Sulfide. For use in all LRRs. A
hydrogen sulfide odor starting at a depth of 30 cm
(12 inches) or less from the soil surface.
User Notes: This “rotten egg smell” indicates that
sulfate-sulfur has been chemically reduced to
hydrogen sulfide gas, which indicates the soil is
anaerobic (fig. 10).
A5.—Stratified Layers. For use in LRRs C, F, K,
L, M, N, O, P, R, S, T, and U; for testing in LRRs
Q, V, and Z. Several stratified layers starting at
a depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or less from the soil
surface. At least one of the layers has value of
3 or less and chroma of 1 or less, or it is muck,
mucky peat, peat, or a mucky modified mineral
texture. The remaining layers in the upper 15
cm (6 inches) have chroma of 2 or less. For any
sandy material that constitutes the layer with
value of 3 or less and chroma of 1 or less, at
least 70 percent of the visible soil particles must
be masked with organic material when viewed
through a 10x or 15x hand lens.
User Notes: Use of this indicator may require
assistance from a trained soil scientist with local
experience. A stratified layer is depositional and
not pedogenic. An undisturbed sample must be
observed. Individual strata are dominantly less
than 2.5 cm (1 inch) thick. A hand lens is an
excellent tool to aid in the identification of this
indicator. Many alluvial soils have stratified
layers at greater depths than allowed in the
requirements of the indicator; these soils do not
meet the requirements of this indicator.
13
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
Many alluvial soils have stratified layers at the
required depths but do not have chroma of 2
or less; these do not meet the requirements of
this indicator. The stratified layers occur in any
soil texture (fig. 11). In sandy textures observed
without a hand lens, the masked sand particles
appear to be closer to 100 percent masked with
organic material when moist. Masked sand grains
can disappear quickly if a soil has been drained or
disturbed.
A6.—Organic Bodies. For use in LRRs P
(except for MLRA 136), T, U, and Z. Presence
of 2 percent or more organic bodies of muck or
a mucky modified mineral texture, starting at a
depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or less from the soil
surface.
User Notes: Organic bodies typically occur at
the tips of fine roots. In order to meet the Organic
Bodies indicator, the organic carbon content in
organic bodies must meet the requirements of
muck or mucky modified textures. The size of the
organic body is not specifically defined, but the
bodies are commonly 1 to 3 cm (0.5 to 1 inch) in
diameter (fig. 12).
Many organic bodies do not have the required
content of organic carbon and as a result do not
meet this indicator. For example, organic bodies
of mucky peat (hemic material) and/or peat (fibric
14
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
material) do not meet the requirements of this
indicator nor does material consisting of partially
decomposed root tissue. The Organic Bodies
indicator includes the indicator previously named
“accretions” (Florida Soil Survey Staff, 1992).
A7.—5 cm Mucky Mineral. For use in LRRs P
(except for MLRA 136), T, U, and Z. A layer of
mucky modified mineral soil material 5 cm (2
inches) or more thick, starting at a depth of 15 cm
(6 inches) or less from the soil surface (fig. 13).
User Notes: “Mucky” is a USDA texture modifier
for mineral soils. The content of organic carbon
ranges from 5 to 12 percent.
A8.—Muck Presence. For use in LRRs Q, U, V,
and Z. A layer of muck with value of 3 or less and
chroma of 1 or less, starting at a depth of 15 cm
(6 inches) or less from the soil surface.
User Notes: The presence of muck of any
thickness at a depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or less
is the only requirement. Normally, this expression
of anaerobiosis is at the soil surface; however,
it may occur at any depth 15 cm (6 inches) or
less. Muck is sapric soil material with a minimum
content of 12 percent organic carbon. Organic
soil material is called muck if virtually all of the
material has undergone sufficient decomposition
to prevent the identification of plant parts. Mucky
peat (hemic material) and/or peat (fibric material)
do not qualify. Generally, muck is black and has a
“greasy” feel; sand grains should not be evident.
A9.—1 cm Muck. For use in LRRs D, F, G, H, P
(except for MLRA 136), and T; for testing in LRRs
C, I, J, and O. A layer of muck 1 cm (0.5 inch) or
more thick with value of 3 or less and chroma of 1
or less, starting at a depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or
less from the soil surface.
15
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
User Notes: Unlike indicator A8, Muck Presence,
this indicator has a minimum thickness
requirement of 1 cm (fig. 14).
Normally, this expression of anaerobiosis is at the
soil surface; however, it may occur at any depth
of 15 cm (6 inches) or less. Muck is sapric soil
material with a minimum content of 12 percent
organic carbon. Organic soil material is called
muck if virtually all of the material has
undergone sufficient decomposition to limit the
recognition of plant parts. Mucky peat (hemic
material) and/or peat (fibric material) do not
qualify. Generally, muck is black and has a
“greasy” feel; sand grains should not be evident.
A10.—2 cm Muck. For use in LRRs M and N; for
testing in LRRs A, B, E, K, L, and S (except for
MLRA 148). A layer of muck 2 cm (0.75 inch) or
more thick with value of 3 or less and chroma of 1
or less, starting at a depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or
less from the soil surface.
User Notes: This indicator requires a minimum
muck thickness of 2 cm. Normally, this expression
of anaerobiosis is at the soil surface; however,
it may occur at any depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or
less. Muck is sapric soil material with a minimum
content of 12 percent organic carbon. Organic
soil material is called muck if virtually all of the
material has undergone sufficient decomposition
to limit the recognition of plant parts. Mucky peat
(hemic material) and/or peat (fibric material) do
not qualify. Generally, muck is black and has a
“greasy” feel; sand grains should not be evident.
A11.—Depleted Below Dark Surface. For use
in all LRRs except for W, X, and Y; for testing
in LRRs W, X, and Y. A layer with a depleted or
gleyed matrix that has 60 percent or more chroma
of 2 or less, starting at a depth of 30 cm (12
inches) or less from the soil surface and having a
minimum thickness of either
1. 15 cm (6 inches), or
2. 5 cm (2 inches) if the 5 cm consists of
fragmental soil material.
Organic, loamy, or clayey layer(s) above the
depleted or gleyed matrix must have value of 3 or
less and chroma of 2 or less starting at a depth
of 15 cm (6 inches) or less from the soil surface
and extend to the depleted or gleyed matrix. Any
loamy fine sand and coarser material above the
depleted matrix must have value of 3 or less
and chroma of 1 or less starting at a depth of 15
cm (6 inches) or less from the soil surface and
extend to the depleted or gleyed matrix. When
viewed through a 10x or 15x hand lens, at least
70 percent of the visible sand particles must be
masked with organic material.
User Notes: The depleted matrix can occur in
either sandy soil layers or loamy and clayey soil
layers. This indicator often occurs in Mollisols but
16
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
also applies to soils with umbric epipedons and
dark-colored ochric epipedons (figs. 15 and 16).
For soils with dark-colored epipedons greater
than 30 cm (12 inches) thick, use indicator A12.
A depleted matrix requires value of 4 or more and
chroma of 2 or less.
Redox concentrations, including soft iron-
manganese masses and/or pore linings, are
required in soils with matrix colors of 4/1, 4/2,
or 5/2. A, E, and calcic horizons may have low
chromas and high values and may therefore
be mistaken for a depleted matrix; however,
they are excluded from the concept of depleted
matrix unless the soil layer has 2 percent or
more distinct or prominent redox concentrations
occurring as soft masses or pore linings. In
sandy textures observed without a hand lens, the
masked sand particles appear to be closer to 100
percent masked with organic material when moist.
Masked sand grains can disappear quickly if a
soil has been drained or disturbed.
17
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
A12.—Thick Dark Surface. For use in all LRRs.
A layer 15 cm (6 inches) or more thick with a
depleted or gleyed matrix that has 60 percent
or more chroma of 2 or less starting at a depth
below 30 cm (12 inches) from the soil surface.
The layer(s) above the depleted or gleyed matrix
and starting at a depth of less than 15 cm (6
inches) from the soil surface must have value of
2.5 or less and chroma of 1 or less to a depth of
30 cm (12 inches) or more and a value of 3 or
less and chroma of 1 or less in any remaining
layers above the depleted or gleyed matrix. In
any loamy fine sand and coarser material above
the depleted or gleyed matrix, at least 70 percent
of the particles must be masked with organic
material when viewed through a 10x or 15x hand
lens.
User Notes: The depleted matrix can occur in
either sandy soil layers or loamy and clayey soil
layers. This indicator applies to soils that have
a very dark layer of 30 cm (12 inches) or more
thick and then can get a little less dark in any
remaining layers directly above a depleted or
gleyed matrix (fig. 17). This indicator is most often
associated with overthickened soils in concave
landscape positions. A depleted matrix requires a
value of 4 or more and chroma of 2 or less. Redox
concentrations, including soft iron-manganese
masses and/or pore linings, are required in soils
with matrix colors of 4/1, 4/2, or 5/2. A, E, and
calcic horizons may be mistaken for a depleted
matrix because they may have low chromas
and high values. These horizons are excluded
from the concept of a depleted matrix unless
they have at least 2 percent distinct or prominent
concentrations occurring as soft masses or pore
linings. In sandy textures observed without a
hand lens, the masked sand particles appear to
be closer to 100 percent masked with organic
material when moist. Masked sand grains can
disappear quickly if a soil has been drained or
disturbed.
A13.—Alaska Gleyed. For use in LRRs W, X,
and Y. A mineral layer with more than 50 percent
gleyed matrix. The layer starts at a depth of 30
cm (12 inches) or less from the mineral surface
and is underlain at a depth 1.5 m (60 inches) or
less from the soil surface by soil material with
hue of 5Y or redder in the same type of parent
material.
User Notes: The indicator has two requirements
(fig. 18). First, one or more of the specified gley
colors occurs at 30 cm (12 inches) or less from
the soil surface. These must be the colors on the
pages of the “Munsell Soil Color Book” (X-Rite,
2009) that show gley colors, not simply gray colors.
Second, below these gley colors, the color of
similar soil material is 5Y or redder (2.5Y, 10YR,
7.5YR, etc.). The presence of the truly gley colors
indicates that the soil has undergone reduction.
18
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
The requirement for 5Y or redder colors lower
in the profile ensures that the gley colors are
not simply the basic color of the parent material.
Some tidal sediments, lacustrine sediments, loess,
and glacial tills have base colors that appear as
gley. This indicator proves that the near-surface
gley colors are the result of anaerobic conditions.
When comparing the near-surface and underlying
colors, make sure that both are the same type
of soil material. Many soils in Alaska consist of
two or more types of material (e.g., silty loess
overlying gravelly glacial till or sand and gravel
river deposits).
A14.—Alaska Redox. For use in LRRs W, X,
and Y. A mineral layer that has dominant hue of
5Y with chroma of 3 or less or a gleyed matrix of
10 percent or more distinct or prominent redox
concentrations occurring as pore linings with value
and chroma of 4 or more. The layer occurs at a
depth of 30 cm (12 inches) or less from the soil
surface.
User Notes: In a soil layer that has been
reduced, one of the first areas where oxygen will
be reintroduced is along pores and the channels
of live roots (fig. 19). As oxidation occurs in
these areas, characteristic reddish orange
redox concentrations (with value and chroma
of 4 or more) will be apparent along the pores
and linings. These will stand out in contrast to
the matrix color of the overall soil layer. First,
19
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
determine if the dominant color(s) of the soil
layer match the chroma 3 or less or gley colors
indicated. Then, break open pieces of the soil
and look for reddish orange redox concentrations
along pores and root linings. The occurrence of
these concentrations indicates that the soil has
been reduced during periods of saturation and is
now oxidizing in a drier state.
A15.—Alaska Gleyed Pores. For use in LRRs
W, X, and Y. A mineral layer of 10 percent or more
gleyed matrix colors along root channels or other
pores and that starts at a depth of 30 cm (12
inches) or less from the soil surface. The matrix
has a dominant hue of 5Y or redder.
User Notes: In a soil layer that is becoming
anaerobic, reduced conditions will first occur
where the soil microbes have an ample supply
of organic carbon. Colder soils, such as those in
Alaska, normally have a low content of organic
carbon, so the microbes will congregate along
the channels containing dead roots. Gley colors
will first appear along these channels (fig. 20).
In a soil layer that is not already dominated by
gley colors, break open pieces of the soil and
look closely at the root channels. Many of these
will be very thin or fine. See if you can observe
thin coatings along the channels that match the
gley colors listed in the indicator. If they occur,
they indicate that the soil experiences anaerobic
conditions.
A16.—Coast Prairie Redox. For use in MLRA
150A of LRR T; for testing in LRR S (except for
MLRA 149B). A layer starting at a depth of 15
cm (6 inches) or less from the soil surface that is
10 cm (4 inches) or more thick and has a matrix
chroma of 3 or less with 2 percent or more distinct
or prominent redox concentrations occurring as
soft masses and/or pore linings.
User Notes: These hydric soils occur mainly on
depressional landforms and portions of the
intermound landforms on the Lissie Formation.
Redox concentrations occur mainly as
iron-dominated pore linings. Common or many
redox concentrations are required. Matrix colors
with chroma 3 are allowed because they may be
the color of stripped sand grains or because few
or common sand-sized reddish chert particles
occur and may prevent obtaining chroma of 2 or
less.
A17.—Mesic Spodic. For use in MLRA 144A and
145 of LRR R and in MLRA 149B of LRR S.
A layer that is 5 cm (2 inches) or more thick, that
starts at a depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or less from
the mineral soil surface, that has value of 3 or
less and chroma of 2 or less, and that is directly
underlain by either
1. one or more layers of spodic materials that
have a combined thickness of 8 cm (3 inches)
or more, that start at a depth of 30 cm (12
inches) or less from the mineral soil surface,
and that have a value and chroma 3 or less;
or
2. one or more layers that have a combined
thickness of 5 cm (2 inches) or more, that start
at a depth of 30 cm (12 inches) or less from
the mineral soil surface, that have a value of 4
or more and chroma of 2 or less, and that are
directly underlain by one or more layers that
have a combined thickness of 8 cm (3 inches)
or more, that are spodic materials, and that
have a value and chroma of 3 or less.
20
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
User Notes: This indicator is used to identify wet
soils that have spodic materials or that meet the
definition of Spodosols. The layer or layers
described above that have value of 4 or more and
chroma of 2 or less are typically described as E or
Eg horizons. The layer or layers that are 8 cm (3
inches) or more thick, that have value and chroma
of 3 or less, and that meet the definition of spodic
materials (that is, have an illuvial accumulation of
amorphous materials consisting of organic carbon
and aluminum with or without Fe) are typically
described as Bh, Bhs, or Bhsm horizons. These
Bh, Bhs, or Bhsm horizons typically have several
color patterns, cementation, or both.
A18.—Iron Monosulfide. For use in all LRRs.
Positive identification of dark-gray or black iron
monosulfide concentrations with value of 4 or less
and chroma of 2 or less, starting at a depth of 25
cm (10 inches) or less from the soil surface.
User Notes: Positive identification of this
indicator requires a minimum of 2 separate
observations of iron monosulfide (FeS)
concentrations in the soil occurring as stains,
coatings, soft masses, or pore linings. Care
should be taken to observe the occurrence of FeS
immediately following excavation as these
compounds can oxidize rapidly with exposure to
the atmosphere. The presence of FeS
concentrations is confirmed by documenting
dark-gray or black colored areas within the soil
matrix and its subsequent degradation using
either: (A) oxidation following exposure to the
atmosphere or with application of an oxidizing
agent such as dilute hydrogen peroxide, both of
which result in an increase in Munsell value of
1 or more; or (B), the evolution of hydrogen
sulfide gas following application of dilute
hydrochloric acid. See the “Glossary” for a
description of methods to identify FeS (fig. 21).
Sandy Soils
“Sandy Soils” have layers that have a USDA
texture of loamy fine sand and coarser. All
mineral layers above any of the layers meeting
the requirements of any S indicator, except for
indicators S6 and S11, have a dominant chroma
of 2 or less, or the thickness of the layer(s)
with a dominant chroma of more than 2 is less
than 15 cm (6 inches). In addition, nodules and
concretions are not considered to be redox
concentrations. Use the following S indicators for
soils with mineral layers that are sandy.
S1.—Sandy Mucky Mineral. For use in all LRRs
except T, U, W, X, Y, and Z and all but MLRA 136
of P. A layer of mucky modified sandy soil
material 5 cm (2 inches) or more thick starting at
a depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or less from the soil
surface.
User Notes: “Mucky” is a USDA texture modifier
for mineral soils. The content of organic carbon
is at least 5 percent and ranges to as high as 12
percent.
21
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
S2.—2.5 cm Mucky Peat or Peat. For use in
LRRs G and H. A layer of mucky peat or peat 2.5
cm (1 inch) or more thick with value of 4 or less
and chroma of 3 or less, starting at a depth of 15
cm (6 inches) or less from the soil surface, and
underlain by sandy soil material.
User Notes: Mucky peat (hemic soil material) and
peat (fibric soil material) have a minimum organic
carbon content of 12 percent. Organic soil
material is called peat if virtually all of the plant
remains are sufficiently intact to permit
identification of plant remains. Mucky peat is at
an intermediate stage of decomposition between
peat and highly decomposed muck. To ascertain
if mucky peat and/or peat are present, determine
the percentage of rubbed fibers.
S3.—5 cm Mucky Peat or Peat. For use in LRRs
F and M; for testing in LRRs K, L, and R. A layer
of mucky peat or peat 5 cm (2 inches) or more
thick with value of 3 or less and chroma of 2 or
less, starting at a depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or
less from the soil surface, and underlain by sandy
soil material.
User Notes: Mucky peat (hemic soil material) and
peat (fibric soil material) have a minimum organic
carbon content of 12 percent. Organic soil
material is called peat if virtually all of the plant
remains are sufficiently intact to permit
identification of plant remains. Mucky peat is at
an intermediate stage of decomposition between
peat and highly decomposed muck. To ascertain
if mucky peat and/or peat are present, determine
the percentage of rubbed fibers.
S4.—Sandy Gleyed Matrix. For use in all LRRs,
except for W, X, and Y. A gleyed matrix that
occupies 60 percent or more of a layer starting at
a depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or less from the soil
surface.
User Notes: Gley colors are not synonymous
with gray colors (fig. 22). They are the colors on
the gley color pages in the “Munsell Soil Color
Book” (X-Rite, 2009) that have hue of N, 10Y,
5GY, 10GY, 5G, 10G, 5BG, 10BG, 5B, 10B, or
5PB and value of greater than or equal to 4.
For this indicator, the gleyed matrix only has
to be present at a depth of 15 cm (6 inches)
or less from the surface; there is no thickness
requirement for the layer.
S5.—Sandy Redox. For use in all LRRs, except
for Q, V, W, X, and Y. A layer starting at a depth of
22
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
15 cm (6 inches) or less from the soil surface that
is 10 cm (4 inches) or more thick and has a matrix
with 60 percent or more chroma of 2 or less and
2 or more percent distinct or prominent redox
concentrations occurring as soft masses and/or
pore linings.
User Notes: “Distinct” and “prominent” are
defined in the “Glossary.” Redox concentrations
include iron and manganese masses (reddish
mottles) and pore linings (Vepraskas, 1994).
Included within the concept of redox
concentrations are iron-manganese bodies
occurring as soft masses with diffuse
boundaries. Common (2 to less than 20
percent) or many (20 percent or more) redox
concentrations are required. If the soil is saturated
at the time of sampling, it may be necessary to
let it dry to a moist condition for redox features to
become visible (figs. 23 and 24). This is a very
common indicator of hydric soils and is often used
to identify the hydric and nonhydric soil boundary
in sandy soil layers.
S6.—Stripped Matrix. For use in all LRRs,
except for V, W, X, and Y. A layer starting at a
depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or less from the soil
surface in which iron-manganese oxides and/
or organic matter have been stripped from the
matrix and the primary base color of the soil
material has been exposed. The stripped areas
and translocated oxides and/or organic matter
form a faintly contrasting pattern of two or more
colors with diffuse boundaries. The stripped zones
are 10 percent or more of the volume and are
rounded.
User Notes: This indicator includes the indicator
previously named “polychromatic matrix” as well
as the term “streaking.” Common or many areas
of stripped (unmasked) soil materials are
required. The stripped areas are typically 1 to 3
cm (0.5 to 1 inch) in size but may be larger or
smaller (fig. 25). Commonly, the stripped areas
have a value of 5 or more and chroma of 2 or
less and the unstripped areas have chroma of 3
and/or 4. The matrix may not have the material
with chroma of 3 and/or 4. The mobilization and
translocation of oxides and organic matter is the
23
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
important process and should result in a splotchy
pattern of masked and unmasked soil areas.
This may be a difficult pattern to recognize and is
more evident when a horizontal slice is observed.
Assistance from an experienced soil or wetland
scientist can aid in identifying this indicator.
S7.—Dark Surface. For use in LRRs K, L, M, N,
P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, and Z. A layer 10 cm
(4 inches) thick, starting at a depth of 15 cm (6
inches) or less from the soil surface, with a matrix
value of 3 or less and chroma of 1 or less. At
least 70 percent of the visible soil particles must
be masked with organic material when viewed
through a 10x or 15x hand lens. The matrix color
of the layer directly below the dark layer must
have the same colors as described above or any
color with a chroma of 2 or less.
User Notes: An undisturbed sample must be
observed (fig. 26). Many wet soils have a ratio of
about 50 percent soil particles that are masked
with organic matter and about 50 percent
unmasked soil particles, giving the soils a
salt-and-pepper appearance. Where the organic
matter coverage is less than 70 percent, the
Dark Surface indicator does not occur. Observed
without a hand lens, the masked sand particles
appear to be closer to 100 percent masked with
organic material when moist. Masked sand grains
can disappear quickly if a soil has been drained or
disturbed.
S8.—Polyvalue Below Surface. For use in LRRs
R, S, T, and U; for testing in LRRs K and L.
A layer with a value of 3 or less and chroma of
1 or less starting at a depth of 15 cm (6 inches)
or less from the soil surface. At least 70 percent
of the visible soil particles must be masked with
organic material when viewed through a 10x or
15x hand lens. Directly below this layer, 5 percent
or more of the soil volume has a value of 3 or less
and chroma of 1 or less, and the remainder of the
24
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
soil volume has value of 4 or more and chroma of
1 or less to a depth of 30 cm (12 inches) or to the
spodic horizon.
User Notes: This indicator applies to soils with a
very dark gray or black surface or near-surface
layer that is typically less than 10 cm (4 inches)
thick but has no thickness requirement and is
underlain by a layer in which organic matter has
been differentially distributed within the soils by
water movement (fig. 27). The mobilization and
translocation of organic matter result in splotchy
coated and uncoated soil. Observed without a
hand lens, the masked sand particles appear to
be closer to 100 percent masked with organic
material when moist. Masked sand grains can
disappear quickly if a soil has been drained or
disturbed.
S9.—Thin Dark Surface. For use in LRRs R, S,
T, and U; for testing in LRRs K and L. A layer 5
cm (2 inches) or more thick, starting at a depth
of 15 cm (6 inches) or less from the soil surface,
with value of 3 or less and chroma of 1 or less. At
least 70 percent of the visible soil particles must
be masked with organic material when viewed
through a 10x or 15x hand lens. This layer is
underlain by a layer or layers with value of 4 or
less and chroma of 1 or less to a depth of 30 cm
or a spodic horizon.
User Notes: This indicator applies to soils with
a very dark gray or black near-surface layer that
is 5 cm (2 inches) or more thick and is underlain
by a layer in which organic matter has been
carried downward by flowing water (fig. 28). The
mobilization and translocation of organic
matter result in an even distribution of organic
matter in the eluvial (E) horizon. The chroma of
1 or less is critical because it limits application of
this indicator to only those soils that are depleted
of iron. This indicator commonly occurs in hydric
Spodosols, but a spodic horizon is not required.
Observed without a hand lens, the masked sand
particles appear to be closer to 100 percent
masked with organic material when moist.
Masked sand grains can disappear quickly if a
soil has been drained or disturbed.
S11.—High Chroma Sands. For use along
shorelines and near shore regions of the Great
Lakes in LRRs K and L. In coastal zones and
dune-and-swale complexes, a layer 5 cm (2
inches) or more thick starting at a depth of 10
cm (4 inches) or less from the soil surface with
chroma of 4 or less and 2 percent or more distinct
or prominent redox concentrations.
User Notes: Along the shorelines of the Great
Lakes within LRRs L and K, some wetlands
exhibit the presence of high chroma sands (often
chroma 3 to 4). These high-chroma, sandy soils
occur at the landward edge of coastal marshes
or in interdunal landscape positions of dune-
and-swale complexes. These soils exhibit redox
25
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
concentrations as pore linings, soft masses, or
both starting at a depth of 10 cm (4 inches) or
less from the soil surface. In adjacent upland
areas, redox concentrations are absent or are
only observed at a depth 15 cm (6 inches) or
more from the soil surface. It may be helpful to
involve a soil scientist to identify soils that qualify
for this indicator.
S12.—Barrier Islands 1 cm Muck. For use in
MLRA 153B and 153D of LRR T. In the swale
portion of dune-and-swale complexes of barrier
islands, a layer of muck 1 cm (0.5 inch) or more
thick with value of 3 or less and chroma of 2 or
less and starting at a depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or
less from the soil surface.
User Notes: This indicator is similar to A9 but
allows chroma of 1 or more but not greater than
2. The indicator is limited to dune-and-swale
complexes on barrier islands.
Loamy and Clayey Soils
“Loamy and Clayey Soils” have layers with USDA
textures of loamy very fine sand and finer. All
mineral layers above any of the layers meeting
the requirements of any F-indicator(s) except for
indicators F8, F12, F19, F20, and F21 have a
dominant chroma of 2 or less, or the thickness
of the layer(s) with a dominant chroma of more
than 2 is less than 15 cm (6 inches). (See figure
4.) Also, except for indicator F16, nodules and
concretions are not considered to be redox
concentrations. Use the following F indicators for
mineral layers that are loamy and clayey.
F1.—Loamy Mucky Mineral. For use in all LRRs,
except for N, Q, R, S, V, W, X, and Y, those using
A7 (LRRs P, T, U, and Z), and MLRA 1 of LRR
A. A layer of mucky modified loamy or clayey soil
material 10 cm (4 inches) or more thick starting at
a depth of 15 cm (6 inches) or less from the soil
surface.
User Notes: “Mucky” is a USDA texture modifier
for mineral soils. The content of organic carbon
ranges from 5 to 12 percent.
F2.—Loamy Gleyed Matrix. For use in all LRRs,
except for W, X, and Y. A gleyed matrix that
occupies 60 percent or more of a layer starting at
a depth of 30 cm (12 inches) or less from the soil
surface (fig. 29).
User Notes: Gley colors are not synonymous
with gray colors. They are the colors on the gley
color pages of the “Munsell Soil Color Book”
(X-Rite, 2009) that have hue of N, 10Y, 5GY,
10GY, 5G, 10G, 5BG, 10BG, 5B, 10B, or 5PB and
value of 4 or more. The gleyed matrix only has to
be present at a depth of 30 cm (12 inches) or less
from the soil surface, and there is no thickness
requirement for the layer.
26
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
F3.—Depleted Matrix. For use in all LRRs,
except W, X, and Y; for testing in LRRs W, X,
and Y. A layer that has a depleted matrix with 60
percent or more chroma of 2 or less and that has
a minimum thickness of either
1. 5 cm (2 inches), starting at a depth of 10 cm
(4 inches) or less from the soil surface, or
2. 15 cm (6 inches), starting at a depth of 25 cm
(10 inches) or less from the soil surface.
User Notes: This is a very common indicator
used to delineate wetland soils in many regions
and landscape positions. A depleted matrix
requires a value of 4 or more and chroma of 2
or less (fig. 30). Redox concentrations, including
soft iron-manganese masses and/or pore linings,
are required in soils with matrix colors of 4/1, 4/2,
or 5/2. A, E, and calcic horizons may have low
chromas and high values and may therefore be
mistaken for a depleted matrix; however, they
are excluded from the concept of depleted matrix
unless the layer has 2 percent or more distinct or
prominent redox concentrations occurring as soft
masses or pore linings. The low-chroma matrix
must be the result of wetness and not a
weathering or parent material feature.
27
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
F6.—Redox Dark Surface. For use in all LRRs,
except W, X, and Y; for testing in LRRs W, X, and
Y. A layer that is 10 cm (4 inches) or more thick,
starting at a depth of 20 cm (8 inches) or less
from the mineral soil surface, and has
1. matrix value of 3 or less and chroma of 1
or less and 2 percent or more distinct or
prominent redox concentrations occurring as
soft masses or pore linings, or
2. matrix value of 3 or less and chroma of 2 or
less and 5 percent or more distinct or
prominent redox concentrations occurring as
soft masses or pore linings.
User Notes: This is a very common indicator
used to delineate wetland soils that have a dark
surface layer. Redox concentrations in mineral
soils with a high content of organic matter and a
dark surface layer are commonly small and
difficult to see (figs. 31, 32, and 33). The organic
matter masks some or all of the concentrations
that may be present. Careful examination is
required to see what commonly brownish redox
concentrations in the darkened materials are. If
the soil is saturated at the time of sampling, it may
be necessary to let it dry at least to a moist
condition for redox features to become visible.
28
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
Typically, unless the soil is ponded with
saturation only occurring near the surface, the
material below the indicator will have a depleted
or gleyed matrix. Soils that are subject to ponding
or have a shallow, perched layer of saturation
may have any color below the dark surface. It is
recommended that delineators evaluate the
hydrologic source and examine and describe the
layer below the dark-colored surface layer when
applying this indicator. This indicator is easily
human-induced if a plow pan or other human-
made confining layer is present. In these cases,
the human-induced feature may have caused
the development of a hydric soil. Removal of the
feature that is causing the perching of water can
eliminate the source of water causing anaerobic
conditions to occur; therefore, the soil is no longer
actively forming as a hydric soil.
F7.—Depleted Dark Surface. For use in all LRRs
except W, X, and Y; for testing in LRRs W, X, and
Y. Redox depletions with value of 5 or more and
chroma of 2 or less in a layer that is 10 cm (4
inches) or more thick, starting at a depth of 20 cm
(8 inches) or less from the mineral soil surface,
and has
1. matrix value of 3 or less and chroma of 1 or
less and 10 percent or more redox depletions,
or
2. matrix value of 3 or less and chroma of 2 or
less and 20 percent or more redox depletions.
User Notes: Care should be taken not to mistake
mixing of an E or calcic horizon into the surface
layer for depletions. The pieces of E and calcic
horizons are not redox depletions. Knowledge of
local conditions is helpful in areas where E and/or
calcic horizons may be present. In soils that are
wet because of subsurface saturation, the layer
directly below the dark surface layer will typically
have a depleted or gleyed matrix. Redox
depletions should have associated redox
concentrations (see figs. 32 and 33) that occur as
Fe pore linings or masses within the depletion(s)
or surrounding the depletion(s).
F8.—Redox Depressions. For use in all LRRs
except W, X, and Y; for testing in LRRs W, X,
and Y. In closed depressions subject to ponding,
5 percent or more distinct or prominent redox
concentrations occurring as soft masses or pore
linings in a layer that is 5 cm (2 inches) or more
thick and starts at 10 cm (4 inches) or less from
the soil surface.
User Notes: This indicator occurs on
depressional landforms, such as vernal pools,
playa lakes, rainwater basins, Grady ponds,
Carolina Bays, and potholes (figs. 34 and 35).
This indicator is also common in backwater
depressions of flood plains such as swamps or
sloughs. It does not occur in solitary
microdepressions (approximately 1 m scale) or on
convex or planar slope shape positions.
F10.—Marl. For use in LRR K, L, and U. A layer
of marl with value of 5 or more and chroma of 2 or
less starting at a depth of 10 cm (4 inches) or less
from the soil surface (fig. 36).
User Notes: Marl is a limnic material deposited
in water by precipitation of calcium carbonate by
algae as defined in “Soil Taxonomy” (Soil Survey
Staff, 1999). It has a Munsell value of 5 or more
and reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to evolve
carbon dioxide. Marl is not the carbonatic
substrate material associated with limestone
bedrock. Some soils have materials with all of the
properties of marl, except for the required Munsell
value. These soils are hydric if the required value
is present at a depth of 10 cm (4 inches) or less
from the soil surface. Normally, this indicator
occurs at the soil surface. There is no thickness
requirement to meet this indicator.
F11.—Depleted Ochric. For use in MLRA 151 of
LRR T. A layer 10 cm (4 inches) or more thick in
which 60 percent or more of the matrix has value
of 4 or more and chroma of 1 or less. The layer
starts at a depth 15 cm (6 inches) or less from the
soil surface.
User Notes: This indicator is applicable in deltaic
accreting areas along the Mississippi River.
F12.—Iron-Manganese Masses. For use in
LRRs N, O, P, and T; for testing in LRRs D, K,
L, M, and R. On flood plains, a layer 10 cm (4
inches) or more thick with 40 percent or more
29
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
User Notes: These iron-manganese masses
generally are small (2 to 5 mm in size) and have
value and chroma of 3 or less (fig. 37). They
can be dominated by manganese and therefore
have a color approaching black. The low matrix
chroma must be the result of wetness and not
be a weathering or parent material feature. Iron-
manganese masses should not be confused with
the larger and redder iron nodules associated
with plinthite or with concretions that have sharp
boundaries. This indicator occurs on flood plains
along rivers, such as the Apalachicola, Congaree,
Mobile, Savannah, and Tennessee Rivers.
F13.—Umbric Surface. For use in LRRs P, T,
and U and MLRA 122 of LRR N. A layer 25 cm
(10 inches) or more thick, starting at a depth of
15 cm (6 inches) or less from the soil surface, in
which the upper 15 cm (6 inches) has value of 3
or less and chroma of 1 or less and in which the
30
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
lower 10 cm (4 inches) has the same colors as
those described above or any other color that has
chroma of 2 or less.
User Notes: The thickness requirements may be
slightly less than those for an umbric epipedon
(fig. 38).
F16.—High Plains Depressions. For use in
MLRAs 72 and 73 of LRR H; for testing in other
MLRAs of LRR H. In closed depressions that are
subject to ponding, a mineral soil that has chroma
of 1 or less to a depth of 35 cm (13.5 inches) or
more from the soil surface and a layer of 10 cm (4
inches) or more thick starting at a depth of 25 cm
(10 inches) or less from the mineral soil surface
that has either
1. one percent or more redox concentrations
occurring as nodules or concretions, or
2. redox concentrations occurring as
nodules or concretions with distinct or
prominent corona (halo).
User Notes: This indicator is applicable in closed
depressions in western Kansas, southwestern
Nebraska, eastern Colorado, and southeastern
Wyoming. It occurs in such soils as those of the
Ness and Pleasant series. The matrix color of the
35-cm (13.5-inch) layer must have chroma of less
than or equal to 1; chroma-2 matrix colors are
excluded; value generally is 3. The nodules and
concretions are rounded, are hard or very hard,
range in size from less than 1 mm to 3 mm, and
most commonly are black or reddish black. The
corona generally is reddish brown, strong brown,
or yellowish brown. The nodules and concretions
can be removed from the soil, and the corona
will occur as coatings on the concentration or will
remain attached to the soil matrix. Use of 10x
to 15x magnification aids in the identification of
these features.
F17.—Delta Ochric. For use in MLRA 151 of
LRR T. A layer 10 cm (4 inches) or more thick in
which 60 percent or more of the matrix has value
of 4 or more and chroma of 2 or less and there
are no redox concentrations. This layer starts at
a depth of 20 cm (8 inches) or less from the soil
surface.
User Notes: This indicator is applicable in
accreting areas of the Mississippi River Delta.
F18.—Reduced Vertic. For use in MLRA 150 of
LRR T; for testing in all LRRs with Vertisols and
Vertic intergrades. In Vertisols and Vertic
intergrades, a positive reaction to
alpha-alpha-dipyridyl that:
1. is the dominant (60 percent or more) condition
of a layer 10 cm (4 inches) or more thick
starting at a depth of 30 cm (12 inches) or
less; or 5 cm (2 inches) or more thick starting
31
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
at a depth 15 cm (6 inches) or less from the
muck or mineral surface,
2. occurs for 7 or more continuous days and 28
cumulative days, and
3. occurs during a normal or drier season and
month.
User Notes: The time requirements for this
indicator were identified from research in MLRA
150A in LRR T (Gulf Coast Prairies). These
requirements or slightly modified time
requirements may be used to identify wetland
Vertisols and Vertic intergrades in other parts of
the Nation. These soils generally have thick, dark
surface horizons, but indicators A11, A12, and F6
commonly are not evident, possibly because of
masking of redoximorphic features by organic
carbon. These soils are a special case of the
“Problem Soils with Thick, Dark A Horizons” listed
in the “Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation
Manual“ (Environmental Laboratory, 1987).
F19.—Piedmont Flood Plain Soils. For use
in MLRAs 148 and 149A of LRR S; for testing
on flood plains subject to piedmont deposition
throughout LRRs P, S, and T. On flood plains,
a mineral layer 15 cm (6 inches) or more thick,
starting at a depth of 25 cm (10 inches) or less
from the soil surface, with a matrix (60 percent or
more of the volume) chroma of less than 4 and
20 percent or more distinct or prominent redox
concentrations occurring as soft masses or pore
linings.
User Notes: This indicator is for use or testing
on flood plains in the mid-Atlantic and southern
parts of the Piedmont province and in areas
where sediments derived from the Piedmont are
being deposited on flood plains on the Coastal
Plain (fig. 39). This indicator does not apply to
stream terraces, which are associated with a
historic stream level and are representative of
an abandoned flood plain. While these soils are
found on flood plains, flooding may be rare, and
groundwater is often the source of hydrology.
F20.—Anomalous Bright Loamy Soils. For
use in MLRA 149A of LRR S and MLRAs 153C
and 153D of LRR T; for testing in MLRA 153B of
LRR T. Within 200 m (656 feet) from estuarine
marshes or water and at a depth 1 m (3.28 feet)
or less of mean high water, a mineral layer 10 cm
(4 inches) or more thick, starting at a depth of 20
cm (8 inches) or less from the soil surface, with a
matrix (60 percent or more of the volume) chroma
of less than 5 and 10 percent or more distinct or
prominent redox concentrations occurring as soft
masses or pore linings and/or depletions.
User Notes: These soils are expected to occur
on linear or convex landforms that are adjacent to
estuarine marshes or water (fig. 40).
F21.—Red Parent Material. For use in MLRA
127 of LRR N; MLRA 145 of LRR R; and MLRAs
147 and 148 of LRR S; for testing in all soils
derived from red parent materials. A layer derived
from red parent materials (see “Glossary”) that
is 10 cm (4 inches) or more thick, starting at
a depth of 25 cm (10 Inches) or less from the
soil surface with a hue of 7.5YR or redder. The
matrix has a value and chroma of more than 2
and 4 or less. The layer must contain 10 or more
percent depletions and/or distinct or prominent
concentrations occurring as soft masses or pore
32
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
linings. Redox depletions should differ in color by
having
1. a minimum difference of one value higher and
one chroma lower than the matrix, or
2. value of 4 or more and chroma of 2 or less
than the matrix (fig. 41).
User Notes: This indicator was developed for use
in areas of red parent material, such as
residuum in the Piedmont Province Triassic
Lowlands section or the Paleozoic “red beds” of
the Appalachian Mountains, and in alluvium or
colluvium derived from these materials. This
indicator may occur along the Red River
(Arkansas and Louisiana). In glaciated areas, the
indicator may form in glacial till, outwash, deltaic
sediments, or glaciolacustrine sediments derived
from similar parent materials in the area. Soils
potentially derived from red parent materials
should be evaluated to determine the Color
Change Propensity Index (CPPI) and be shown to
have CCPI values less than 30 (Rabenhorst and
Parikh, 2000). In landscapes where mixing or
stratification of parent materials occur, it cannot
be assumed that sediment overlying red parent
material is derived solely from that parent
material. The total percentage of all redox
concentrations and redox depletions must add
up to 10 percent or more to meet the threshold
for this indicator. This indicator is typically found
at the boundary between hydric and non-hydric
33
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
soils. Other, more common indicators may be
found on the interior (fig. 42). Mack et al. (2019)
provides maps of soils and geologic features
associated with red parent materials. It may be
helpful to involve a soil scientist familiar with
these soils to identify those soils that qualify for
this indicator.
F22.—Very Shallow Dark Surface. For use in
MLRA 138 and west Florida portions of MLRA
152A of LRR T and MLRA 154 of LRR U; for
testing in all other MLRAs and LRRs. In
depressions and flood plains subject to frequent
ponding and/or flooding, one of the following must
be observed:
1. If bedrock occurs between 15 cm
(6 inches) and 25 cm (10 inches) of the soil
surface, a layer of 15 cm (6 inches) or more
thick starting at a depth 10 cm (4 inches) or
less from the soil surface with value of 2.5 or
less and chroma 1 or less, and the remaining
soil to bedrock must have the same colors as
above or any other color that has chroma of 2
or less; or
2. If bedrock occurs at a depth of 15 cm (6
inches) or less from the soil surface, more
than half of the soil thickness must have value
of 2.5 or less and chroma 1 or less, and the
remaining soil to bedrock must have the same
color as above or any other color that has a
chroma of 2 or less.
35
References
Berkowitz J. F., Vepraskas M. J., Vaughan K. L., and Vasilas L.M. (2021).
Development and application of the Hydric Soil Technical Standard. Soil
Science Society of America Journal 85(3), 469–487. https://doi.org/10.1002/
saj2.20202
Duball, C., Vaughan, K., Berkowitz, J. F., Rabenhorst, M. C., and VanZomeren,
C. M. (2020). Iron monosulfide identification: Field techniques to provide
evidence of reducing conditions in soils. Soil Science Society of America
Journal 84(2), 303–313. https://doi.org/10.1002/saj2.20044
Elless, M. P., and Rabenhorst, M. C. (1994). Hematite in the shales of the
Triassic Culpeper Basin of Maryland. Soil Science 158(2), 150–154.
Elless, M.P., Rabenhorst, M. C., and James, B. R. (1996). Redoximorphic
features in soils of the Triassic Culpeper Basin. Soil Science 161(1), 58–69.
Environmental Laboratory. (1987). Corps of Engineers wetlands delineation
manual (Technical Report Y-87-1). United States Army Corps of Engineers.
Waterways Experiment Station.
Changes in Hydric Soils of the United States, 60 Fed. Reg. 10349 (February
24, 1995).
Florida Soil Survey Staff. (1992). Soil and water relationships of Florida’s
ecological communities. USDA, Soil Conservation Service.
Mack, S. C., Berkowitz J. F., and Rabenhorst M. C. (2019). Improving hydric
soil identification in areas containing problematic red parent materials: a
nationwide collaborative mapping approach. Wetlands 39, 685–703.
McBride, M. B. (1994). Environmental chemistry of soils. Oxford University
Press.
Rabenhorst, M. C., and Parikh, S. (2000). Propensity of soils to develop
redoximorphic color changes. Soil Science Society of America Journal 64(5),
1904–1910. https://doi.org/10.2136/sssaj2000.6451904x
Soil Survey Staff. (2017). Soil survey manual (Agriculture Handbook 18). U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Soil Survey Staff. (1999). Soil Taxonomy: A basic system of soil classification
for making and interpreting soil surveys (Agriculture Handbook 436, 2nd ed.).
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Soil Survey Staff. (2022). Keys to soil taxonomy (13th ed.). USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service.
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
36
Soil Survey Staff. (2023). Soil Survey Technical Note 430-SS-2 Soil Color
Contrast.
United States Army Corps of Engineers. (2012). Regional supplement to the
Corps of Engineers wetland delineation manual: northcentral and northeast
region (Version 2.0, ERDC/EL TR-12-1). U.S. Army Engineer Research and
Development Center.
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. (2010). National Food Security Act manual, 5th edition, title 180, part
510.
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. (2022). Land resource regions and major land resource areas of the
United States, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Basin (Agriculture Handbook
296). U.S. Government Printing Office.
Vaughan, K. L., Miller, F., Navarro, N., and Appel, C. (2016). Visual
assessment of sulfate reduction to identify hydric soils. Soil Science Society of
America Journal, 80(4), 1114–1119. https://doi.org/10.2136/sssaj2016.02.0035
Vepraskas, M. J. (1994). Redoximorphic features for identifying aquic
conditions (Technical Bulletin 301). North Carolina Agricultural Research
Service, North Carolina State University.
von Post, L., Granlund, E. (1926). Södra Sveriges Torvtillgånger, I. Sveriges
Geologiska Undersökning C35, 19(2).
X-Rite. 2009. Munsell soil color charts (rev. ed.).
37
Glossary
As defined in this Glossary, terms marked with an asterisk (*) have definitions that are slightly different
from the definitions in the referenced materials. The definitions in the Glossary are intended to assist
users of this document and are not intended to add to or replace definitions in the referenced materials.
A horizon. A mineral soil horizon that formed at
the surface or below an O horizon where organic
material is accumulating. See “Soil Taxonomy”
(Soil Survey Staff, 1999) for a complete definition.
Accreting areas. Landscape positions in which
soil material accumulates through deposition from
higher elevations or upstream positions more
rapidly than the rate at which soil material is being
lost through erosion.
Anaerobic. A condition in which molecular
oxygen is virtually absent from the soil.
Anaerobiosis. Microbiological activity under
anaerobic conditions.
Aquic conditions. Conditions in the soil
represented by depth of saturation, occurrence of
reduction, and redoximorphic features. See “Soil
Taxonomy” (Soil Survey Staff, 1999) for a
complete definition.
*Artificial drainage. The use of human efforts
and devices to remove free water from the soil
surface or from the soil profile (fig 43). The
hydrology may also be modified by levees and
dams, which keep water from entering a site
(fig. 44).
Calcic horizon. An illuvial horizon in which
carbonates have accumulated to a significant
extent. See “Soil Taxonomy” (Soil Survey Staff,
1999) for a complete definition.
Calcium carbonate. Calcium carbonate has the
chemical formula of CaCO3
. It effervesces when
treated with cold hydrochloric acid.
Closed depressions. Low-lying areas that are
surrounded by higher ground and have no
natural outlet for surface drainage.
38
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
Common. When referring to redox
concentrations, redox depletions, or both,
“common” represents 2 to 20 percent of the
observed surface.
Concave landscapes. Landscapes in which the
surface curves downward.
Concretions. Firm to extremely firm, irregularly
shaped bodies with sharp to diffuse boundaries.
When broken in half, concretions have concentric
layers. See Vepraskas (1994) for a complete
discussion.
*Depleted matrix. For mineral soil layers, a
depleted matrix refers to the volume of a soil
horizon or subhorizon in which the processes
of reduction and translocation have removed or
transformed iron, creating colors of low chroma
and high value (fig. 45). A, E, and calcic horizons
may have low chromas and high values and
may therefore be mistaken for a depleted matrix;
however, they are excluded from the concept of
depleted matrix unless the soil has common or
many distinct or prominent redox concentrations
occurring as soft masses or pore linings. In some
areas the depleted matrix may change color upon
exposure to air (see “Reduced matrix”); this
phenomenon is included in the concept of
depleted matrix. The following combinations of
value and chroma identify a depleted matrix:
1. Matrix value of 5 or more and chroma of 1
or less with or without redox concentrations
occurring as soft masses and/or pore linings;
or
2. Matrix value of 6 or more and chroma of 2
or less with or without redox concentrations
occurring as soft masses and/or pore linings;
or
39
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
3. Matrix value of 4 or 5, chroma of 2, and 2
percent or more distinct or prominent redox
concentrations occurring as soft masses and/
or pore linings; or
4. Matrix value of 4, a chroma of 1, and 2
percent or more distinct or prominent redox
concentrations occurring as soft masses and/
or pore linings (fig. 46).
Diffuse boundary. Used to describe
redoximorphic features that grade gradually from
one color to another (fig. 47). The color grade is
commonly 2 mm or more wide.
Distinct. Readily seen but contrasting only
moderately with the color to which compared. The
contrast is distinct for the following:
1. Delta hue equal to 0, then
a. delta value of 2 or less and delta chroma
1 to less than 4, or
b. delta value of 2 to less than 4 and delta
chroma less than 4.
2. Delta hue equal to 1, then
a. delta value of 1 or less and delta chroma
more than 1 to less than 3, or
b. delta value greater than 1 to less than 3
and delta chroma less than 3.
3. Delta hue equal to 2, then
a. delta value equal to 0 and delta chroma
greater than 0 to less than 2, or
b. delta value greater than 0 to less than 2
and delta chroma less than 2.
Exception: if the compared colors have both a
value of 3 or less and a chroma 2 or less, then the
color contrast is faint regardless of hue difference
(fig. 48).
For a more detailed explanation of how to
determine color contrast, see “Soil Survey
Technical Note 430-SS-2” on “Soil Color Contrast”
(Soil Survey Staff, 2023).
E horizon. A mineral horizon in which the
dominant process is loss of silicate clay, iron, and/
or aluminum, leaving a concentration of sand and
silt particles (fig. 49). See “Soil Taxonomy” (Soil
Survey Staff, 1999) for a complete definition.
Epipedon. A horizon that has developed at the
soil surface. See “Soil Taxonomy” (Soil Survey
Staff, 1999) for a complete definition.
Faint. Evident only on close examination. The
contrast is faint if
1. delta hue equal to 0, then delta value of 2 or
less and delta chroma of 1 or less, or
2. delta hue equal to 1, then delta value of 1 or
less and delta chroma of 1 or less, or
40
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
Manual” (Soil Survey Staff, 2017).
3. delta hue equal to 2, then delta value equal to
0 and delta chroma equal to 0, or
4. any delta hue if both colors have a value of 3
or less and chroma 2 or less (table 1).
Table 1: Upper Threshold for Faint
Δ Hue Δ Value Δ Chroma
0 2 or less 1 or less
1 1 or less 1 or less
2 0 0
Δ Hue If Value If Chroma
Any 3 or less 2 or less
Any feature above the upper threshold for faint
features would be considered either distinct or
prominent. If an indicator requires distinct or
prominent features, then the features at or
below the faint threshold are not considered.
Fe-Mn concretions. Firm to extremely firm,
irregularly shaped bodies with sharp to diffuse
boundaries. When broken in half, concretions
have concentric layers. See Vepraskas (1994) for
a complete discussion.
Fe-Mn nodules. Firm to extremely firm, irregularly
shaped bodies with sharp to diffuse boundaries.
When broken in half, nodules do not have visibly
organized internal structure. See Vepraskas
(1994) for a complete discussion.
Few. When referring to redox concentrations,
redox depletions, or both, “few” represents fewer
than 2 percent of the area in an exposed face of a
soil profile.
41
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
Fibric. See “Peat.”
Flooded. A condition in which the soil surface is
temporarily covered with flowing water from any
source, such as streams overflowing their banks,
runoff from adjacent or surrounding slopes, inflow
from high tides, or any combination of sources.
Flood plain. The nearly level plain that borders a
stream and is subject to inundation under
flood-stage conditions unless protected
artificially. It is usually a constructional landform
built of sediment deposited during overflow and
lateral migration of the stream.
Fragmental soil material. Soil material that
consists of 90 percent or more rock fragments.
Less than 10 percent of the soil consists of
particles 2 mm or smaller.
Frequently flooded or ponded. A frequency
class in which flooding or ponding is likely to
occur often under usual weather conditions (a
chance of greater than 50 percent in any year or
greater than 50 times in 100 years).
Glauconitic. Refers to a mineral aggregate that
contains a micaceous mineral resulting in a
characteristic green color, e.g., glauconitic shale
or clay (fig. 50).
*g. A horizon suffix indicating that the horizon
is gray because of wetness but not necessarily
that it is gleyed. All gleyed matrices (defined
below) should have the suffix “g”; however, not
all horizons with the “g” suffix are gleyed. For
example, a horizon with the color 10YR 6/2 that
is at least seasonally wet, with or without other
redoximorphic features, should have the “g” suffix.
*Gleyed matrix. Soils with a gleyed matrix have
the following combinations of hue, value, and
chroma (the soils are not glauconitic):
1. 10Y, 5GY, 10GY, 10G, 5BG, 10BG, 5B, 10B,
or 5PB with value of 4 or more and chroma of
1; or
2. 5G with value of 4 or more and chroma of 1 or
2; or
3. N with value of 4 or more; or
4. in some places the gleyed matrix may change
color upon exposure to air. (See “Reduced
matrix”). This phenomenon is included in the
concept of gleyed matrix (figs. 50, 51, and 52).
*Hemic. See “Mucky peat.”
Histels. Organic soils that overlie permafrost and
show evidence of cryoturbation. See “Soil
Taxonomy” (Soil Survey Staff, 1999) for a
complete definition.
Histic epipedon. A thick (20- to 60-cm, or 8- to
24-inch) organic soil horizon that is saturated with
water at some period of the year (unless the soil
is artificially drained) and that is at or near the
surface of a mineral soil.
Histosols. Organic soils that have organic soil
materials in more than half of the upper 80 cm
(32 inches) or that have organic materials of
any thickness if they overlie rock or fragmental
materials that have interstices filled with organic
42
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
soil materials. See “Soil Taxonomy” (Soil Survey
Staff, 1999) for a complete definition.
Horizon. A layer, approximately parallel to the
surface of the soil, distinguishable from adjacent
layers by a distinctive set of properties produced
by soil-forming processes. See “Soil Taxonomy”
(Soil Survey Staff, 1999) for a complete definition.
Hydric soil definition. A soil that formed under
conditions of saturation, flooding, or ponding long
enough during the growing season to develop
anaerobic conditions in the upper part (“Changes
in Hydric Soils of the United States, 60 Fed. Reg.
10349,” 1995).
Hydrogen sulfide odor. The odor of H2
S. It is
similar to the smell of rotten eggs.
Iron monosulfide (FeS). Dark-gray or black
precipitates with matrix of 4 or less and chroma of
2 or less occurring in the soil as stains, coatings,
soft masses, or pore linings (Duball et al., 2020).
These compounds rapidly oxidize when exposed
to the atmosphere resulting in a 1 or more unit
increase in Munsell value. Proper identification
of FeS is critical to differentiate it from other
dark soil materials such as organic matter and
manganese oxides. The flowchart (fig. 53) should
be employed to identify FeS features.
Layer(s). A horizon, subhorizon, or combination
of contiguous horizons or subhorizons sharing the
properties required by the indicator.
Lithologic discontinuity. Occurs in a soil that
has developed in more than one type of parent
43
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
LRR. Land resource region. LRRs are
geographic areas characterized by a particular
pattern of soils, climate, water resources, and
land use. Each LRR is assigned a different
letter of the alphabet (A-Z). LRRs are defined in
“U.S.Department of Agriculture Handbook 296”
(USDA, NRCS, 2022).
Many. When referring to redox concentrations,
redox depletions, or both, “many” represents
greater than 20 percent of the observed surface.
Marl. An earthy, unconsolidated deposit
consisting chiefly of calcium carbonate mixed with
clay in approximately equal proportions; formed
primarily under freshwater lacustrine conditions.
See “Soil Taxonomy” (Soil Survey Staff, 1999) for
a complete definition.
*Masked. Through redoximorphic processes, the
color of soil particles is hidden by organic
material, silicate clay, iron, aluminum, or some
combination of these.
Matrix. The dominant soil volume that is
continuous in appearance. When three colors
occur, such as when a matrix, depletions, and
concentrations are present, the matrix may
represent less than 50 percent of the total soil
volume.
MLRA. Major land resource area. MLRAs are
geographically associated divisions of land
resource regions. MLRAs are defined in “U.S.
Department of Agriculture Handbook 296” (USDA,
NRCS, 2022).
Mollic epipedon. A mineral surface horizon that
is relatively thick, dark colored, and humus rich
and has high base saturation (fig. 54). See “Soil
Taxonomy“ (Soil Survey Staff, 1999) for a
complete definition.
Mollisols. Mineral soils that have a mollic
epipedon. See “Soil Taxonomy” (Soil Survey Staff,
1999) for a complete definition.
Muck. Sapric organic soil material in which
virtually all of the organic material is so
decomposed that identification of plant forms is
not possible. Use only with organic horizons (of
any thickness) of mineral and organic soils that
are saturated for 30 or more cumulative days in
normal years or are artificially drained.
*Mucky modified mineral soil material. A USDA
soil texture modifier, e.g., mucky sand. Mucky
modified mineral soil material has between 5 and
12 percent organic carbon. Where the organic
component is peat (fibric material) or mucky peat
(hemic material), mucky mineral soil material
does not occur.
Mucky peat. Hemic organic material, which
is characterized by decomposition that is
intermediate between that of peat (fibric material)
and that of muck (sapric material). Use only with
organic horizons (of any thickness) of mineral and
organic soils that are saturated for 30 or more
44
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
Nodules. Firm to extremely firm, irregularly
shaped bodies with sharp to diffuse boundaries.
When broken in half, nodules do not have visibly
organized internal structure. See Vepraskas
(1994) for a complete discussion.
NRCS. USDA, Natural Resources Conservation
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service).
NTCHS. National Technical Committee for Hydric
Soils.
Organic matter. Plant and animal residue in the
soil in various stages of decomposition.
Organic soil material. Soil material that is
saturated with water for long periods or artificially
drained and, excluding live roots, has 12 percent
or more (by weight) organic carbon. If the soil
is never saturated for more than a few days, it
contains 20 percent or more organic carbon.
Organic soil material includes muck, mucky peat,
and peat. See “Soil Taxonomy” (Soil Survey Staff,
1999) for a complete definition.
Peat. Fibric organic soil material. The plant forms
can be identified in virtually all of the organic
material. Use only with organic horizons (of any
thickness) of mineral and organic soils that are
saturated for 30 or more cumulative days in
normal years or are artificially drained. Peat has
three-fourths or more fibers after rubbing.
Ped. A unit of soil structure such as a block,
column, granule, plate, or prism, formed by
natural processes (in contrast with a clod, which
is formed artificially).
Plinthite. The sesquioxide-rich, humus-poor,
highly weathered mixture of clay with quartz and
other diluents. See “Soil Taxonomy” (Soil Survey
Staff, 1999) for a complete discussion.
45
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
Ponding. Standing water in a closed depression
that is removed only by percolation, evaporation,
or transpiration. The ponding lasts for greater
than 7 days.
Pore linings. Zones of accumulation that may be
either coatings on a ped or pore surface or
impregnations of the matrix adjacent to the pore
or ped (fig. 55). See Vepraskas (1994) for a
complete discussion.
Prominent. Contrasts strongly in color. Color
contrasts more contrasting than faint and distinct
are prominent.
Red parent material. The parent material with a
natural inherent reddish color attributable to the
presence of iron oxides, typically hematite
(Elless and Rabenhorst, 1994; Elless et al.,
1996), occurring as coatings on and occluded
within mineral grains. Soils that formed in red
parent material have conditions that greatly retard
the development and extent of the redoximorphic
features that normally occur under prolonged
aquic conditions. They typically have a Color
Change Propensity Index (CCPI) of less than 30
(Rabenhorst and Parikh, 2000). Most commonly,
the material consists of dark red, consolidated
Mesozoic or Paleozoic sedimentary rocks, such
as shale, siltstone, and sandstone, or alluvial
materials derived from such rocks. Assistance
from a local soil scientist may be needed to
determine where red parent material occurs.
Redox concentrations. Bodies of apparent
accumulation of Fe-Mn oxides (figs. 55 and 56).
Redox concentrations include soft masses, pore
linings, nodules, and concretions. For the
purposes of the indicators, nodules and
concretions are excluded from the concept of
redox concentrations unless otherwise specified
by specific indicators. See Vepraskas (1994) for a
complete discussion.
Redox depletions. Bodies of low chroma (2 or
less) having value of 4 or more where Fe-Mn
oxides have been stripped or where both Fe-Mn
oxides and clay have been stripped (fig. 56). See
Vepraskas (1994) for a complete discussion.
Redoximorphic features. Features formed by
the processes of reduction, translocation, and/or
oxidation of Fe and Mn oxides (figs. 55 and 56);
formerly called mottles and low-chroma colors.
See Vepraskas (1994) for a complete discussion.
Reduced matrix. A soil matrix that has low
chroma and high value, but in which the color
changes in hue or chroma when the soil is
exposed to air. See Vepraskas (1994) for a
complete discussion.
*Reduction. For the purpose of the indicators,
reduction occurs when the redox potential (Eh) is
below the ferric-ferrous iron threshold as adjusted
for pH. In hydric soils, this is the point when the
transformation of ferric iron (Fe3+
) to ferrous iron
(Fe2+
) occurs.
Relict features. Soil morphological features that
reflect past hydrologic conditions of saturation
and anaerobiosis. See Vepraskas (1994) for a
complete discussion.
46
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
*Sapric. See “Muck.”
Saturation. Wetness characterized by zero or
positive pressure of the soil water. Almost all of
the soil pores are filled with water.
Sharp boundary. Used to describe
redoximorphic features that grade sharply from
one color to another. The color grade is
commonly less than 0.1 mm wide.
Soft masses. Noncemented redox
concentrations, frequently within the soil matrix,
that are of various shapes and cannot be
removed as discrete units (see fig. 56).
Soil pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity in
the soil.
Soil texture. The relative proportions, by weight,
of sand, silt, and clay particles less than 2 mm in
size in the soil material.
Spodic horizon. A mineral soil horizon that is
characterized by the illuvial accumulation of
amorphous materials consisting of aluminum and
organic carbon with or without iron (figs. 57 and
58). The spodic horizon has a minimum
thickness, a minimum quantity of oxalate
extractable carbon plus aluminum, and/or specific
color requirements.
Stream terrace. Flat-topped landforms in a
stream valley that flank and are parallel to the
stream channel, originally formed by previous
stream level, and representing the abandoned
flood plain, stream bed, or valley floor produced
during a past state of fluvial erosion or deposition
(i.e., currently very rarely or never flooded;
inactive cut and fill and/or scour and fill
processes). Stream terraces may occur singularly
or as a series. Erosional surfaces cut into
bedrock and thinly mantled with stream deposits
(alluvium) are called “strath terraces.” Remnants
of constructional valley floors thickly mantled with
alluvium are called “alluvial terraces.”
Umbric epipedon. A thick, dark mineral surface
horizon with base saturation of less than 50
percent. See “Soil Taxonomy” (Soil Survey Staff,
1999) for a complete definition.
47
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
Vertisol. A mineral soil with 30 percent or
more clay in all layers. These soils expand and
shrink, depending on moisture content, and
have slickensides or wedge-shaped peds. See
“Soil Taxonomy” (Soil Survey Staff, 1999) for a
complete definition.
Wetland. An area that has hydrophytic
vegetation, hydric soils, and wetland hydrology,
as per the “National Food Security Act Manual”
(USDA NRCS, 2010) and the “1987 Corps
of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual”
(Environmental Laboratory, 1987).
49
Appendices
Appendix 1: Approved Indicators by Land Resource Regions (LRRs) and
Certain Major Land Resource Areas (MLRAs)
LRR						 Indicators
A		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, F1 (except for MLRA 1), F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
B		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
C		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
D		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A9, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
E		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
F		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A9, A11, A12, A18, S1, S3, S4, S5, S6, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
G		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A9, A11, A12, A18, S1, S2, S4, S5, S6, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
H		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A9, A11, A12, A18, S1, S2, S4, S5, S6, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8, F16 (MLRAs 72
		 and 73)
I		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
J		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
K		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, S7, S11, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8, F10
L		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, S7, S11, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8, F10
M		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A10, A11, A12, A18, S1, S3, S4, S5, S6, S7, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
N		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A10, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, S7, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8, F12, F13 (MLRA
		 122), F21 (MLRA 127)
O		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, F1, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8, F12
P		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6 (except MLRA 136), A7 (except for MLRA 136), A9 (except for MLRA 136),
		 A11, A12, A18, S1 (except MLRA 136), S4, S5, S6, S7(MLRA 136), F2, F3, F6, F7, F8, F12,
		 F13, F22 (MLRA 138 and West Florida portion of 152A)
Q		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A8, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S6, S7, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
R		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A11, A12, A17 (MLRA 144A and 145), A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, S7, S8, S9, F2,
		 F3, F6, F7, F8, F21 (MLRA 145)
S		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A11, A12, A17 (MLRA 149B), A18, S1, S4, S5, S6, S7, S8, S9, F2, F3, F6, F7,
		 F8, F19 (MLRAs 148 and 149A), F20 (MLRA 149A), F21 (MLRA 147 and 148)
T		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6, A7, A9, A11, A12, A16 (MLRA 150A), A18, S4, S5, S6, S7, S8, S9, S12
		 (MLRA 153B and 153D), F2, F3, F6, F7, F8, F11 (MLRA 151), F12, F13, F17 (MLRA 151),
		 F18 (MLRA150), F20 (MLRAs 153C and 153D), F22 (MLRA 138 and west Florida portion of
		 152A)
U		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6, A7, A8, A11, A12, A18, S4, S5, S6, S7, S8, S9, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8, F10,
		 F13, F22 (MLRA 154)
V		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A8, A11, A12, A18, S1, S4, S7, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
W		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A12, A13, A14, A15, A18
X		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A12, A13, A14, A15, A18
Y		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A12, A13, A14, A15, A18
Z		 A1, A2, A3, A4, A6, A7, A8, A11, A12, A18, S4, S5, S6, S7, F2, F3, F6, F7, F8
50
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
Appendix 2: Test Indicators by Land Resource Regions (LRRs) and
Certain Major Land Resource Regions (MLRAs)
LRR						 Indicators
A		 A10, F21, F22
B		 A10, F18, F21, F22
C		 A9, F18 (MLRA 14), F21, F22
D		 F12, F21,F22
E		 A10, F21, F22
F		 F18 (MLRA 56), F21, F22
G		 F21, F22
H		 F16 (except for MLRAs 72 and 73), F21, F22
I		 A9, F21, F22
J		 A9, F18 (MLRA 86), F21, F22
K		 A10, S3, S8, S9, F12, F21, F22
L		 A10, S3, S8, S9, F12, F21, F22
M		 F12, F21, F22
N		 F21, F22
O		 A9, F18 (MLRA 131), F21 (MLRA 131C), F22
P		 F18 (MLRA 135), F19, F21, F22 (except for MLRA 138 and West Florida portion of MLRA 152A
Q		 A5, F21, F22
R		 S3, F12, F21, F22, TA6 (MLRAs 144A and 145)
S		 A10 (except for MLRA 148), A16 (except for MLRA 149B), F19 (except for MLRAs 148 and
		 149A), TA6 (MLRA 149B), F21, F22
T		 F19, F20 (MLRA 153B), F21, F22, TS7 (153B and 153D)
U		 F21, F22 (except for MLRA 154)
V		 A5, F21, F22
W		 A11, F3, F6, F7, F8, F21, F22
X		 A11, F3, F6, F7, F8, F21, F22
Y		 A11, F3, F6, F7, F8, F21, F22
Z		 A5, F21, F22
51
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils
Appendix 3: Indicators that Have Been Deleted or
Are No Longer Approved for Use
S10. Alaska Gleyed.—This indicator is now indicator A13 (Alaska Gleyed).
F4. Depleted Below Dark Surface.—This indicator is now indicator A11 (Depleted Below Dark
		 Surface).
F5. Thick Dark Surface.—This indicator is now indicator A12 (Thick Dark Surface).
F9. Vernal Pools.—This indicator has been deleted and its concepts are included in Field Indicator F3
(Depleted Matrix).
F14. Alaska Redox Gleyed.—This indicator is now indicator A14 (Alaska Redox).
F15. Alaska Gleyed Pores.—This indicator is now indicator A15 (Alaska Gleyed Pores).
TA1. Playa Rim Stratified Layers.—This test indicator has been deleted.
TA2. Structureless Muck.—This test indicator has been deleted.
TA3. Coast Prairie Redox.—This test indicator has been approved for use and is now A16 (Coast
Prairie Redox).
TS1. Iron Staining.—This test indicator has been deleted.
TS2. Thick Sandy Dark Surface.—This test indicator has been deleted. Its concepts have been
approved for use and are now included with indicator A12 (Thick Dark Surface).
TS3. Dark Surface 2.—This test indicator has been deleted. It is now the same as indicator S7 (Dark
Surface).
TS4. Sandy Neutral Surface.—This test indicator has been deleted. Most of its concepts have been
approved for use and are now included in indicator A11 (Depleted Below Dark Surface).
TS5. Chroma 3 Sandy Redox.—This test indicator has been deleted. It has been approved for use as
		 indicator A16 (Coast Prairie Redox).
TF1. ? cm Mucky Peat or Peat.—This test indicator has been deleted.
TF2. Red Parent Material.—This test indicator has been deleted. Its concept has been approved for
use as indicator F21 (Red Parent Material).
TF3. Alaska Concretions.—This test indicator has been deleted.
TF4. 2.5Y/5Y Below Dark Surface.—This test indicator has been deleted.
TF5. 2.5Y/5Y Below Thick Dark Surface.—This test indicator has been deleted.
TF6. Calcic Dark Surface.—This test indicator has been deleted.
TF7. Thick Dark Surface 2/1.—This test indicator has been deleted. Its concepts have been approved
		 for use and are now included in indicator A12 (Thick Dark Surface).
TF8. Redox Spring Seeps.—This test indicator has been deleted.
TF9. Delta Ochric.—This test indicator has been approved for use and is now indicator F17 (Delta
		 Ochric).
TF10. Alluvial Depleted Matrix.—This test indicator has been deleted.
TF11. Reduced Vertic.—This test indicator has been approved for use and is now indicator F18
(Reduced Vertic).
TF12. Very Shallow Dark Surface.—This test indicator has been approved for use and is now
		 indicator F22 (Very Shallow Dark Surface).

